---
layout: default
title: 2.1 Environments and Libraries
nav_order: 11
---

# 2.1 Environments and Libraries

## Questions we'll cover
- How do I create a virtual environment?
- How do I install the Python libraries that I want to work with?

## Setup

1. Create a project folder where you'll store data and Python scripts.
2. [Download this file](https://github.com/ubc-library-rc/intro-python-series/blob/main/content/book-data.zip), un-zip it, and put it in the folder you just created.
3. Open your project in VS Code (Open VS code, and then select `File > Open Folder`, and open the folder you created).

## Create a local Python environment

Best practice in Python is to create a **virtual environment** for each project, which contains all the specific libraries (and specific versions) that you need for that project.

We will use the `venv` tool to create an environment with the following steps:
1. Open the Command Palette with `Ctrl+Shift+P`
2. Type in **Python: Create Environment** and click on it
3. Select `venv` as the tool we want to use to create the environment
4. Select the Python interpreter that you want to use (probably the one with the highest numbers, starting with something like `Python 3.10`)

After following these steps,  VS Code will create a `.venv` folder in your project folder.

## Activate the environment

VS Code may give you a pop-up asking if you want to activate the virtual environment that you just created.
If it does, select Yes.

If not, you can run a command in the terminal (in VS Code) to activate it.

For **Windows**, you should run `.venv\Scripts\activate`.

For **Mac** or **Linux**, you should run `source .venv/bin/activate`

## Install Python libraries
In the terminal in VS Code, you can install the libraries that we will need for this workshop by running the following commands.

First, we will upgrade `pip`, which is the tool that we use to install Python libraries.

```bash
pip install --upgrade pip
```

Now we can install the libraries `numpy` and `matplotlib`.

```bash
pip install numpy matplotlib
```
